you've called it a biography why well I
was looking for a word that was a little
bit more a descriptive little bit more
personal than history I mean the book
was initially titled the history of
cancer but it somehow felt that the word
history was too inert uh and I needed
something more and when I took a step
back um towards the middle of writing
the book uh it felt as if um I was uh
writing a portrait over time of of
something of course cancer is not one
disease but many diseases but there are
deep parallels that run through these
diseases and it felt I was drawing a
portrait as I was said and that is a
biography and so therefore I called it a
biography what is it about cancer that
seems so human so living well part of it
is that cancer uh cells exploit um uh
processes that are very fundamental to
our lives and by this I mean that the
very genes that are altered um that
unleash cancer are genes that usually
play very typical functions in our
normal cells I'll give you one example
um cancer cells migrate through the body
for instance uh process through called
metastasis when they reach another site
and grow in fact it turns out that the
genes that are activated uh as cancer
cells migrate and as cancer cells set up
shop in another foreign site are in fact
the very genes that other cells use to
migrate through the body such as the
immune system cells or so in other words
cancer is constantly imitating or
perverting normal processes um and
therefore again there's a there's a
quasi there's a quality of normaly
hidden within its abnormaly well you
said earlier that cancer is really a lot
of different things is this the thing
that they all have in common No in fact
I mean the thing that they all have in
common is um cellular growth abnormal
cellular growth that's the common
feature that connects all cancers
melanoma prostate cancer etc etc um but
that again is abnormal cellular growth
that has been Unleashed by mutating or
dis distorting genes that control normal
cellular growth in other words the very
genes that allow your embryos to grow
that allow our brains to grow our bodies
to grow if you distort them if you
mutate them then you unleash abnormal
growth and that of course is the
beginning of cancer well cancer isn't
just a human problem but how old is it
uh for humans is it something that's
been with us since we first started
being hominids yeah so um well in fact
there have been signs of cancer found in
ancient cave Bears so as you're pointing
out it's not a human problem um that
said um we the answer is the quick
answer is we just don't know the word
cancer doesn't arise as the book points
out as I point out in the book the word
does cancer doesn't arise until about uh
you know the time of hypocrates um and
so the diseases that predate that we
don't know um whether they're cancers
but all although imotep did describe
something that I think was cancer that's
right so imotep um is the ancient
Egyptian scribe U first written first
first wrote around 2500 BC and has a
case description that is very remarkably
similar to breast cancer again we don't
know for sure but the case sounds
remarkably like breast cancer but I'm
assuming that we uh in looking at old
records old uh histories we see things
that today we say ah that must have been
cancer absolutely I mean this the I've
written about that extensively in the
book in fact you know as you turn out
through the through history you keep on
coming up with these these incredible
case descriptions these rting
descriptions which remind us that that
you know the disease existed long before
we could even name it but you also say
for most of history at least until the
20th century it seems like cancer was
mostly
ignored uh and you write that it's often
difficult to find references to cancer
in literature before then is that
because people didn't understand what it
was or because cancer uh has really
become much more of a concern uh as we
have been able to live longer well
that's actually that's absolutely right
right that's on point I mean the cancer
many cancers although not all cancers
are age related breast cancer and
prostate cancer being two very
remarkable examples of that um and so in
fact cancer only appears as all other
diseases are eliminated other words in
the 17th century 18th century people
were dying of small poox and chera and
tuberculosis and it's only when when
those other diseases are lifted off it's
when the veil of other illnesses is
moved that you actually encounter cancer
so and we're seeing that with
Alzheimer's now we're seeing that with
many many degenerative diseases diseases
that are related to aging ultimately
absolutely when did the word cancer
enter our vocabulary well the word comes
to us from the Greeks um has a
fascinating derivation the atmology of
the word comes from the fact that
hypocrates apparently um imagined tumors
as crabs a solid tumor as a crab buried
under the skin and the blood vessels
around it um sort of spread out like the
legs of the crab so it's a reminder how
much of this disease is still buried in
metaphor um and you're right that naming
the disease uh is often more important
than describing its characteristics well
the naming of a disease is a very
important moment because it it allows us
for the first time to discriminate that
from normaly it is it is a moment in
time it's sort of like it's like
separating the wheat from everything
else um and it's it's by naming a
disease and by putting it as a category
that Pathologists can begin to discover
what the commonalities and differences
are and that happened in cancer around
as I said the name is long is is very
old but the pathological description of
cancer really comes from the 18th
century